The increasing relevance of competent and critical handling of data in society not only makes it possible to record this competence, but also makes self-perception with regard to this competence increasingly clear. Previous approaches consider this competence primarily against the specific background of individual target groups, jobs or roles (Cui et al., 2023). In addition, only a few explicitly refer to the general population (Cui et al., 2023; Carmi et al., 2020). In view of the various theoretical approaches, there is a need for a uniform definition of data literacy in order to create comparability.
Our aim is therefore to derive a holistic definition based on these approaches and to develop a questionnaire for self-perception of one's own data literacy. To this end, the decisive factors for the construct from previous definitions and operationalizations in various disciplines are brought together. Cognitive interviews are conducted iteratively to create and refine the items. The items are then selected using algorithm-based item selection. The facets of data literacy are comprehensively tested for factorial, discriminant, convergent and congruent incremental validity in order to promote a differentiated understanding of the construct. Construct and criterion validity are tested using correlations and hierarchical regression analyses, while cross-validation checks the robustness of the instrument.
Based on a cross-sectional online questionnaire study, we first examine a representative sample of people from the general population. Limitations arise from the cross-sectional design and the heuristic item reduction, which limit predictions of predictive validity. The heterogeneous nature of the construct makes global instrument development and understanding of all participants difficult.
The self-assessment questionnaire promotes a holistic assessment of competence and its perception for further research, for example by comparing self-assessment and actual performance.